--- Page 1 ---
COSC 310 Data Structures
(2 Lectures, 3 Laboratories – 3 Credits)
Prerequisite: ECCE 230, MATH 234
Course Catalog Description:
Review of object-oriented design. Analysis of algorithm complexity. Fundamental data
structures: Concept of Abstract Data Types (ADTs), Queues, Stacks, Lists, Trees; Java
Collections Framework. Fundamental computing algorithms: binary search trees, hash tables,
heaps, balanced trees, sorting algorithms, searching algorithms.
Textbook:
 Michael Goodrich, Roberto Tamassia, and Michael Goldwasser Data Structures and
Algorithms in Java, Wiley, 6th Edition, 2014, ISBN: 978-1118771334.
Reference Materials:
 Mark A. Weiss, Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in Java, Addison-Wesley, 3rd
Edition, 2012. ISBN: 978-0132576277.
 Duncan A. Buell, Data Structures Using Java, Jones & Bartlett Publishers, 2012. ISBN:
978-1449628079.
Course Topics:
1. Review of object-oriented design and dynamic arrays (ArrayList and Vector) in Java (2
lectures)
2. Algorithm Complexity: Performance of algorithms, time and space tradeoff. Worst case
and average case performance, The big-Oh notation, example calculations of complexity.
(4 lectures)
3. Fundamental Data Structures: Java Collections Framework; Concept of Abstract Data
Types (ADTs); ADT specification, Lists, Stacks, Queues (array and linked structure
implementation); Binary Search Trees, Balanced Binary Search Trees. (10 lectures)
4. Advanced Data Structures: Priority Queues, Heaps; Graphs and Sets. (6 lectures)
5. Sorting and Searching Algorithms: Sorting: Behavior of sorting algorithms, Selection Sort,
Bubblesort, Heapsort, Mergesort, Quicksort, Radix sort; Hashing. (8 lectures)
6. Data Compression: Prefix Codes, Huffman Codes, Tries. (2 Lectures)
Course Structure:
Lectures will either be 2 x 50 minutes per week. The Laboratory sessions will be 1 x 150
minutes per week.The course material will be presented using power point slides that are
available to the students through Moodle. Every newly taught topic will be followed by a
problem solving session, which encourages student’s participation. Also, the course involves
an individual assignment to involve students in a self-learning environment. Labs follow the
lectures to provide hands-on experience for the studied theoretical subjects.
Computer Resources:
Access to computers with Eclipse with Java support and jGrasp.
Laboratory Experiments:
1. Object oriented Design and Dynamic Arrays in Java

--- Page 2 ---
2. Analysis of algorithm complexity (Part 1): Test different algorithms and measure the time
complexity effect in practice.
3. Analysis of algorithm complexity (Part 2): Link the Algorithm complexity concepts from
theory to practice.
4. Manipulating Unsorted Lists: use linear lists to model real life data as well as to learn how
to write client code that uses unsorted list class-interface.
5. Manipulating Sorted Lists: use dynamic lists to model real life data as well as to learn how
to write client code that uses Sorted list class-interface.
6. Manipulating Stacks: use stacks to model real life data as well as to learn how to write
client code that uses stack class-interface.
7. Manipulating Queues: use queues to model real life data as well as to learn how to write
client code that uses queue class-interface.
8. Manipulating Binary Search Tree (BST): use BST to model real life data as well as to learn
how to write client code that uses BST class-interface.
9. Manipulating Red Black Binary Search Tree (Red Black BST): learn how to implement
client code that uses RedBlackBST class-interface.
10. Priority Queue: Experimenting with the use of priority queue ADT.
11. Experiments with Sorting Algorithms performance.
12. Experiments with Hashing: Learn how to build and use dictionaries and hash tables
13. Experiments with Huffman Codes
Assessment:
All course learning outcomes are assessed using the following assessment tools.
Coursework (Quizzes, homework) 20%
Laboratory Assignments 25%
Semester Examination 20%
Final Examination 35%
Contribution to B.Sc. in Computer Science Program Learning Outcomes (PLO):
a b c d e f
H H --- --- --- H
H – High M – Medium L – Low
Course Learning Outcomes (CLO) and Program Learning Outcomes:
Course Learning Outcomes CS PLO
1. Identify and implement the appropriate data structure from the Java a, b
Collection Framework for a particular programming application
2. Analyze iterative and recursive computer programs and algorithms and a, b
identify their order of computational time and space complexity.
3. Analyze & compare data structures for computational time and space a, b
complexity.
4. Formulate problems and to select the most appropriate data structure for a, b
their solutions.
5. Design, implement & manipulate data structures based on standard b, f
abstract data types, object oriented data abstraction and encapsulation, in
a variety of applications.
6. Compare & apply standard sorting & search algorithms using iterative b, f
and recursive algorithms in a variety of applications.
*This syllabus is augmented by a Syllabus Supplement for Students.