GENS 100 Academic Development and Success
(1 Lecture, 0 Laboratory – 1 Credit) 

Prerequisite: None

Course Catalog Description: 
This interactive student success course helps students apply positive behavioral principles through their university experience and beyond. The course delivers a blended learning experience designed to enhance students’ self-awareness, orient them to KU resources and learning communities, make major declaration decisions, and adopt academic integrity. Students develop the growth mindset necessary to succeed in a global and ever-changing marketplace.

Textbook: None

Reference Materials: 7 Habits of Highly Effective College Students by Sean Covey, Publisher: Franklin Covey, Essentials Edition, 2014. ISBN-10: 1936111616/ ISBN- 978-1936111619.

Course Topics: 
Introduction to course (1 lecture)
Self-awareness and growth mindset (2 lectures) 
Online personality assessment and learning styles
Transition from high school to university 
Major Declaration Program (2 lectures)
Introduction to process
Identifying career choices
Practical application of skills- Accessing university resources (2 lectures) 
MS Outlook and Blackboard LMS platforms 
KU Portal and Navigate
Developing skills in collaboration/teamwork- Experiential learning communities (2 lectures) 
Extracurricular: clubs and societies (‘Find your tribe’)
Leadership skills development- Community service, peer tutoring/mentoring (CTL/Hive)
E-Portfolio: document experience and achievements 
SMART long and short-term academic goals (2 lectures) 
Mission statement
Attributes of work ethic- Managing academic priorities
Attributes in being ethically responsible (2 lectures) 
AI Tech- Chat GPT- resource or cheating tool
Referencing & citation (plagiarism)
Study skills (2 lectures) 
Time and attention management
Revision and retrieval strategies

Structure and Learning Methodologies:
Lectures are 1 x 50 minutes each week, delivered in either a classroom or experiential setting. Students will be required to have access to Blackboard to view or download course-specific material or upload documented evidence of participation in planned experiential learning events and activities. Meetings with instructors for tutorial sessions will also require documentation when necessary.

Laboratory and/or Computer Resources: Access to KU Portal, Blackboard LMS, Navigate, CTL. 

Assessment: All Course Learning Outcomes are assessed using the following assessment tools.
4 In-class Assessments
 25%
 
In-class activities and Homework
 25%
 
Case Study
 10%
 
Documented evidence of engagement (Mid-term & Final Assessments)
 40%
 

Contribution to General Education Learning Outcomes (GELOs):
1A
 1B
 1C
 1D
 1E
 2A
 2B
 2C
 2D
 2E
 3A
 3B
 3C
 3D
 3E
 
---
 ---
 ---
 ---
 ---
 H
 L
 ---
 ---
 L
 H
 M
 ---
 M
 H
 
H – High M – Medium L – Low
 
 
 
 

Course Learning Outcomes & Student Outcomes:
No
 Course Learning Outcomes
 Student Outcomes
 
1
 Exhibit a successful transition from high school to university.
 2A, 2B, 3A, 3E
 
2
 Set SMART long and short-term academic goals.
 3A, 3E
 
3
 Engage with experiential learning communities. 
 2E, 3E
 
4
 Activate academic study skills.
 3D
 
5
 Apply collaborative communication practices.
 2A,3B
 

Organizational Details
 
Course Code and Title:
 GENS 100 Academic Development and Success
 
Semester:
 Fall 2024
 
Schedule:
 
 Classroom: 
 
Instructor:
 
 
Contact Email:
 
 
Office Room Number:
 SAN****, MAIN *****
 
Office Hours:
 
 

Assessment Methodology 
 

 Tentative Dates (subject to change)
 Weight
 
Coursework: We drop the lowest quiz score.
 Quiz 1
 Week 1 (KU Resources Quiz- 5%)
 25%
 

 Quiz 2
 Week 2 (Transition & Growth Mindset- 5%)
 
 

 Quiz 3
 Week 3 (Time & Attention Management- 5%)
 
 

 Quiz 4
 Week 5 (Ethical Use of Chat GPT- 5%)
 
 

 Quiz 5
 Week 6 (Academic Skills- 5%)
 
 

 Quiz 6
 Week 12 (Plagiarism & Citation- 5%)
 
 

 Case study Week 4
 10%
 

 Homework 
 25%
 
Mid-semester Assessment
 Week 8
 15%
 
Final Assessment:
 TBD by the Registrar’s Office
 25%
 

Instructor Policy on late submission of assignments:
Quizzes – There are no make-up quizzes. If you fail to attend a scheduled quiz without an approved absence from the Student Services, then you will receive a grade of zero for that quiz. If the Student Services confirm that your absence from a quiz is approved, then the grade you receive will either be your Semester Examination grade (Quiz 1, Quiz 2, and Quiz 3) or your Final Examination grade (Quiz 4 and Quiz 5).
Semester Examination – There are no make-up Semester Examination. If you fail to attend the scheduled Semester Examination without an approved absence from the Student Services, then you will receive a grade of zero for the Semester Examination. If the Student Services confirm that the absence on the Semester Examination is approved, then the grade that you achieve for the Final Examination will also be assigned as your grade for the Semester Examination.
 

Honor Code Academic Pledge:
"As a Khalifa University student, I will not lie, cheat, steal, or use any unfair means in academic work and will behave according to university rules and UAE societal norms and expectations."
 

TEACHING PLAN (Lecture):
Week
 Dates
 Topic and Reminders
 
 
1
 Aug. 26- 30
 Course Introduction- Course overview, Syllabus, Grading
KU Tools & Resources Outlook, Blackboard, CTL, etc.
Navigating the KU Portal
E-Portfolio
 
 
2
 Sept.
2-6
 Transition from high school to university
Understanding Growth Mindset
 
 
3
 Sept.
9-13
 Time and attention management
 
 
4
 Sept. 16-20
 Priority management
 
 

 Introduction to Case Study
 
 
5
 Sept.
23-27
 Learning styles
Ethical Use of Chat GPT
Case Study Due
 
 
6
 Sept. 30-Oct. 4
 Developing Academic Skills
Retrieval Practice, Interleaving, Spaced Practice, Dual Coding
 
 
7
 Oct. 7-11
 Academic Success Plan
Constructive/Destructive Behavior
 
 
8
 Oct. 14-18
 Midterm Assessment
Mid-term experience overview and realignment
 
 
9
 Oct. 21-25
 Long-term SMART goals- Write your Mission statement
Short-term SMART goals- academic priorities
 
 
10
 Oct. 28-Nov.1
 Building a Strong Work Ethic
Keys to Achieving Goals
 
 
11
 Nov.4-8
 Experiential Learning Communities- clubs, community service
Reflective Practice
 
 
12
 Nov. 11-15
 Plagiarism
Citations and Referencing (Library Services)
 
 
13
 Nov. 18-22
 Collaboration/teamwork- study groups
 
 
14
 Nov. 25-29
 Review
Catch up
 
 
15
 Dec.
4-8
 Final Course Assessment
 
 

Additional Information:
Assessment
There are 5 quizzes scheduled in this course. Four best quiz scores will count towards your final grade. The lowest quiz score will be dropped. No makeup will be granted for quizzes under any circumstance. Any unexcused absence to a quiz will result in a grade of 0% for that quiz.

Case study
Students will work in groups of 3 or 4 on a case study related to modelling and application of the scholastic processes theory learnt in the course. A report shall be submitted in week 15. For every late day, 5% of the grade will be deducted.

Mobile phone Policy

Mobile phones may not be used as calculators in the Quizzes, Semester Examination or Final Examination. Mobile phones must be switched off during quizzes and exams and must be put away for the duration of the quiz/exam.

Calculator Policy
You may use a basic scientific calculator to help you with arithmetic calculations.
Calculators with any sort of graphing, symbolic manipulation or integral and derivative calculation capabilities are strictly prohibited. Any such device found with a student during any form of assessment will be treated as a violation of the above-stated Honor Code Academic Pledge.

Classroom Policies

Discipline is one of the main components of your academic and professional success.

Please make every effort to arrive at the class periods in a timely fashion. Students arriving late to class are a distraction to both the instructor and the other students in the classroom. As per the University policies, any student arriving late to class is to be considered absent.

Please ensure that you sign your name on the Attendance Sheet which is handed-out at the beginning of each class period. Please do not sign-in for absent friends. If you do not sign the Attendance Sheet, then you will be marked “Absent” in the Banner.

If you are absent for any lecture, it is your responsibility to cover the missed material.

Homework Policy

Homework is your responsibility. Homework exercises have been selected to enable you to practice the material covered in the class and to self-test your learning of the material. You are expected to have completed the homework exercises, and to have sought assistance with any of the exercises which have caused you difficulty, before the next class period. Assistance is readily available in Instructor Office Hours.

 

Grading Scheme
Khalifa University Letter Grades & Grade Boundaries: In this course, we will use the following letter grades and grade boundaries for computing students’ final course grades:

Letter Grade
 Percentage Grade Range
 Description
 

 A
 From 92.5% to 100%
 Excellent
 

 A-
 From 89.5% to less than 92.5%
 Very Good
 

 B+
 From 86.5% to less than 89.5%
 
 

 B
 From 82.5% to less than 86.5%
 Good
 

 B-
 From 79.5% to less than 82.5%
 
 

 C+
 From 76.5% to less than 79.5%
 Satisfactory
 

 C
 From 72.5% to less than 76.5%
 
 

 C-
 From 69.5% to less than 72.5%
 Less Than Satisfactory
 

 D
 From 59.5% to less than 69.5%
 Poor
 

 F
 Less than 59.5%
 Fail
 

GENS 100 Academic Development and Success (1-0-1)

UCC: March 2023 PAGE4