--- Page 1 ---
GENS 100 Academic Development and Success
(1 Lecture, 0 Laboratory – 1 Credit)
Prerequisite: None
Course Catalog Description:
This interactive student success course helps students apply positive behavioral principles through their
university experience and beyond. The course delivers a blended learning experience designed to enhance
students’ self-awareness, orient them to KU resources and learning communities, make major declaration
decisions, and adopt academic integrity. Students develop the growth mindset necessary to succeed in a
global and ever-changing marketplace.
Textbook: None
Reference Materials: 7 Habits of Highly Effective College Students by Sean Covey, Publisher:
Franklin Covey, Essentials Edition, 2014. ISBN-10: 1936111616/ ISBN- 978-1936111619.
Course Topics:
1) Introduction to course (1 lecture)
2) Practical application of skills- Accessing university resources (1 lecture)
a) MS Outlook and Blackboard LMS platforms
b) KU Portal and Navigate
3) Self-awareness and growth mindset (2 lectures)
a) Online personality assessment and learning styles
b) Transition from high school to university
4) Developing skills in collaboration/teamwork- Experiential learning and Reflective Practice (2
lectures)
a) Extracurricular: clubs and societies (‘Find your tribe’)
b) Leadership skills development- Community service, peer tutoring/mentoring (CTL/Hive)
c) D.E.E.P Reflection Model
d) E-Portfolio: document experience, Reflections and achievements
5) SMART long and short-term academic goals (2 lectures)
a) Mission statement
b) Attributes of work ethic- Managing academic priorities
6) Academic Success Plan (1 lecture)
7) Study skills (3 lectures)
a) Time and attention management
b) Priority Management
c) Revision and retrieval strategies
8) Major Declaration/Exploration (1 lecture)
9) Attributes in being ethically responsible (2 lectures)
a) Ethical Use of AI Tools- Chat GPT, resource or cheating tool
b) Referencing & citation (plagiarism)
Structure and Learning Methodologies:

--- Page 2 ---
GENS 100 Academic Development and Success (1-0-1)
Lectures are 1 x 50 minutes each week, delivered in either a classroom or experiential setting. Students
will be required to have access to the Learning Management System to view or download course-
specific
1 material or upload documented evidence of participation in planned experiential learning events and
activities. Meetings with instructors for tutorial sessions will also require documentation when
necessary.
Laboratory and/or Computer Resources: Access to KU Portal, LMS, Navigate, CTL.
Assessment: All Course Learning Outcomes are assessed using the following assessment tools.
Assignments (Homework and In Class Activities) 25%
Quizzes (In class and take home) 25%
Case Study 10%
Documented evidence of engagement (midterm and final assessments) 40%
Contribution to General Education Program Learning Outcomes (PLOs):
1A 1B 1C 1D 1E 2A 2B 2C 2D 2E 3A 3B 3C 3D 3E
--- --- --- --- --- H L --- --- L H M --- M H
H – High M – Medium L – Low
Course Learning Outcomes & PLOs:
No Course Learning Outcomes PLOs
1 Exhibit a successful transition from high school to university. 2A, 2B, 3A, 3E
2 Set SMART long and short-term academic goals. 3A, 3E
3 Engage with experiential learning communities. 2E, 3E
4 Activate academic study skills. 3D
5 Apply collaborative communication practices. 2A,3B
Organizational Details
Course Code and Title: GENS 100 Academic Development and Success
Semester: Spring 2024
Schedule: Monday 11 am – 11:50 am Classroom: SAN 1110
Instructor: Dr. Nooreya Al Obeidli
Contact Email: Nooreya.alobeidli@ku.ac.ae
2

--- Page 3 ---
GENS 100 Academic Development and Success (1-0-1)
Office Room Number: SAN: building 2, 2 floor, student success, office 2228E
Office Hours: Monday 12 pm – 3 pm
Assessment Methodology
Tentative Titles (subject to change) Weight
Coursework: Quiz 1 KU Resources
Drop the least quiz grade
Quiz 2 Ethical Use of ChatGPT
Quiz 3 Growth Mindset and Transition to University
25%
Quiz 4 Academic Skills
Quiz 5 Time and Priority Management
Quiz 6 Plagiarism and Citation
Case study 10%
Homework 25%
Mid-semester Assessment
Week 8 15%
Final Examination: TBD by the Registrar’s Office 25%
Instructor Policy on late submission of assignments:
Quizzes – There are no make-up quizzes. If you fail to attend a scheduled quiz without an approved
absence from the Student Services, then you will receive a grade of zero for that quiz. If the Student Services
confirm that your absence from a quiz is approved, then the grade you receive will either be your Semester
Examination grade (Quiz 1, Quiz 2, and Quiz 3) or your Final Examination grade (Quiz 4 and Quiz 5).
Semester Examination – There are no make-up Semester Examination. If you fail to attend the scheduled
Semester Examination without an approved absence from the Student Services, then you will receive a
grade of zero for the Semester Examination. If the Student Services confirm that the absence on the Semester
Examination is approved, then the grade that you achieve for the Final Examination will also be assigned as
your grade for the Semester Examination.
Honor Code Academic Pledge:
"As a Khalifa University student, I will not lie, cheat, steal, or use any unfair means in academic work and will
behave according to university rules and UAE societal norms and expectations."
3

--- Page 4 ---
GENS 100 Academic Development and Success (1-0-1)
TEACHING PLAN (Lecture):
Assessments and
Week Dates Topic and Reminders Activities
• Email your
instructor
• Course Introduction- Course overview, Syllabus, Grading
• KU Resources
• KU Resources:
Jan. Quiz
1 • Outlook, Email etiquette
15- 19 • "My First Week"
• Blackboard, Navigate, KU Portal
ePorfolio
reflection
• ChatGPT Quiz
Jan. • Ethical use of ChatGPT
2 • Learning Styles
2226
• Online personality assessment and learning styles discussion
Assignment
Jan. • Peer tutoring and Mentorship Transition to
29Feb. • Growth Mindset University Quiz
3
02
• How to make a successful transition from high school to
university.
Teamwork
Feb.
4 Working effectively in teams. ePortfolios
05-09
reflection
Feb. Academic Skills
Developing Academic Skills- Revision and retrieval practice,
5
12-16 Quiz
Interleaving and Dual Coding
Online Surveys
Feb.
6 Major Declaration/Exploration submission
19-23
(optional)
Feb.
Introduce
Experiential Learning, communities, clubs, community service
26-
Experiential
7 Reflective Practice
March
Learning
01
Assignment
• Academic
March Constructive and Destructive behavior- Recording grades University Success Plan
8
04-08 Resources (Academic Success Plan) • Success Plan
reflection
Midterm Assessment
• Goal Setting
Survey
March • Long-term SMART goals- Mission statement
9 • Mission
11-15 • Setting academic goals
Statement
Submission
March • Short-term SMART goals- academic priorities Introduce Case
10
18-22 • Ethical responsibility and behavior
Study
4

--- Page 5 ---
GENS 100 Academic Development and Success (1-0-1)
Spring Break
April Time and Priority
11 Time and Attention Management
01-05 Management Quiz
April
12 Priority Management
08-12
Citation and
April
13 Plagiarism, Referencing and Citation Plagiarism
15-19
Quiz
Experiential
Learning
April Assignment due
14 Review and Scaffolding Skills
22-26 (introduced in
week 7)
April Case study due
29May
15 Final Course Assessment Final
03
Assessment
Additional Information:
Assessment
There are 6 quizzes scheduled in this course. The lowest quiz score will be dropped. No makeup will be
granted for quizzes under any circumstance. Any unexcused absence to a quiz will result in a grade
of 0% for that quiz.
5

--- Page 6 ---
GENS 100 Academic Development and Success (1-0-1)
Case study
Students will work on a case study related to modelling and application of the scholastic processes
theory learnt in the course. A report shall be submitted in week 15. For every late day, 5% of the grade
will be deducted.
Mobile phone Policy
Mobile phones may not be used as calculators in the Quizzes, Semester Examination or Final
Examination. Mobile phones must be switched off during quizzes and exams and must be put away
for the duration of the quiz/exam.
Calculator Policy You may use a basic scientific calculator to help you with
arithmetic calculations.
Calculators with any sort of graphing, symbolic manipulation or integral and derivative calculation
capabilities are strictly prohibited. Any such device found with a student during any form of
assessment will be treated as a violation of the above-stated Honor Code Academic Pledge.
Classroom Policies
Discipline is one of the main components of your academic and professional success.
Please make every effort to arrive at the class periods in a timely fashion. Students arriving late to
class are a distraction to both the instructor and the other students in the classroom. As per the
University policies, any student arriving late to class is to be considered absent.
Please ensure that you sign your name on the Attendance Sheet which is handed-out at the beginning
of each class period. Please do not sign-in for absent friends. If you do not sign the Attendance Sheet,
then you will be marked “Absent” in the Banner.
If you are absent for any lecture, it is your responsibility to cover the missed material.
Homework Policy
Homework is your responsibility. Homework exercises have been selected to enable you to practice the
material covered in the class and to self-test your learning of the material. You are expected to have
completed the homework exercises, and to have sought assistance with any of the exercises which have
caused you difficulty, before the next class period. Assistance is readily available in Instructor Office
Hours.
6

--- Page 7 ---
GENS 100 Academic Development and Success (1-0-1)
Grading Scheme
Khalifa University Letter Grades & Grade Boundaries: In this course, we will use the following
letter grades and grade boundaries for computing students’ final course grades:
Letter
Percentage Grade Range Description
Grade
A From 92.5% to 100% Excellent
A- From 89.5% to less than 92.5%
Very Good
B+ From 86.5% to less than 89.5%
B From 82.5% to less than 86.5%
Good
B- From 79.5% to less than 82.5%
C+ From 76.5% to less than 79.5%
Satisfactory
C From 72.5% to less than 76.5%
C- From 69.5% to less than 72.5% Less Than Satisfactory
D From 59.5% to less than 69.5% Poor
F Less than 59.5% Fail
7