MATH 242 Introduction to Probability and Statistics 
(3 Lecture – 3 Credits)

Prerequisite: MATH 112

Course Catalog Description:
This course introduces students to basic probability models and statistical methods for data analysis. The course will cover introductory probability theory, discrete and continuous probability distributions, elements of descriptive statistics, and different statistical inference methods such as estimation for the mean and the variance, hypothesis testing for the mean and the variance.

Textbook: 
Applied Statistics and Probability for Engineers by D. C. Montgomery and G.C. Runger, Publisher: Wiley, 7th Edition (online edition), 2018, ISBN: 978EEGRP45491.

Reference Materials: 
Probability and Statistics by M.H. De Groot and M.J. Schervish, Publisher: Pearson, 4th Edition (New International Edition), 2013, ISBN: 9781292025049. 
All of Statistics: A Concise Course in Statistical Inference, by L. Wasserman, Publisher: Springer, 2nd Corrected Edition, 2004, ISBN: 9780387402727.

Course Topics: 
Introduction to probability: sample spaces, axioms of probability and counting methods (4 lectures)
Conditional probability: law of total probability, Bayes’ theorem and independent events (3 lectures)
Discrete and continuous random variables: probability mass functions, probability density functions, cumulative distribution functions and their use in computing probabilities (4 lectures)
Two-dimensional random vectors, joint and marginal distributions (3 lectures)
Independent random variables and the notion of a random sample (1 lecture)
Expectation, variance and median of a random variable (3 lectures)
Covariance and correlation (2 lectures)
Common discrete probability distributions: Bernoulli, Binomial and Poisson (3 lectures)
Common continuous probability distributions: normal and gamma distributions (3 lectures)
Large sample theory: the law of large numbers, the central limit theorem and precision computations (4 lectures)
Elements of descriptive statistics: frequencies, tables and graphs (2 lectures)
Sampling distributions (I): sample mean, sample variance and their distributions when sampling from normal distributions (2 lectures)
Sampling distributions (II): the chi-squared, the t distribution (2 lectures)
Confidence intervals for the mean based on small normal samples or large arbitrary samples (3 lectures)
Confidence intervals for a proportion based on large arbitrary samples (2 lectures)
Hypotheses testing: t-tests of the mean, tests of a proportion, tests of the variance (4 lectures)

Structure and Learning Methodologies:
Lectures are either 3 x 50 minutes or 2 x 75 minutes per week. Lectures are presented using the whiteboard, and may be complemented with handouts and/or PowerPoint slides.

 
Assessment: 
All course learning outcomes are assessed using the following assessment tools. 
Coursework (Quizzes, assignments )
 30%
 
Project (After Midterm)
 10%
 
Semester Examination(s)
 25%
 
Final Examination 
 35%
 

 
 

Contribution to Applied Mathematics & Statistics Students and Data Science Outcomes (AMSDS-SOs):

a
 b
 c
 d
 e
 f
 g
 h
 
M
 H
 ---
 H
 M
 ---
 H
 ---
 
H – High M – Medium L – Low

Course Learning Outcomes & AMS-SOs:
No.
 Course Learning Outcomes
 AMS-SOs
 
1
 Identify and apply appropriate counting techniques and probability laws.
 a
 
2
 Calculate probabilistic measures related to random variables based on discrete and continuous distribution functions.
 a
 
3
 Apply probabilistic models to various engineering problems.
 a, b
 
4
 Select appropriate statistical techniques for statistical decision-making based on the type of data available.
 a, b,d,e
 
5
 Draw sound statistical conclusions from experiments and observational studies.
 a, b,d,e
 

Organizational Details
 
Course Code and Title:
 MATH 242 Introduction to Probability and Statistics
 
Semester:
 Spring 2025
 
Schedule:
 As in Banner
 
Instructor:
 Ms. Meryem Rhadbane
 
Contact Email:
 Meryem.rhadbane@ku.ac.ae
 
Office Room Number:
 San Campus Building 1, Room No. 021-B
 
Office Hours:
 Monday & Thursday from 4:30 – 5:30 pm, please email me in advance for office location 

 

Assessment Methodology 
 

 Tentative Dates
 Weight 
 
Coursework:

 Quiz 1
 Week 5 (10%)
 40%
 

 Quiz 2
 Week 11 (10%)
 
 

 Assignment 
 Week 8 (10%) 
 
 

 Project 
 Week 15 (10%)
 
 
Semester Examination:
 Week 7: Midterm
 25%
 
Final Examination:
 TBD by the Registrar’s Office
 35%
 

Instructor Policy on Late Submission of Assignments:
Quizzes • There will be no make-up quizzes. If the student fails to attend a scheduled quiz without an approved absence from the Student Success Department, then a grade of zero for that quiz will be assigned. 
• If the student fails to attend a quiz and the Student Success Department confirms that the student's absence from that quiz is approved, then the grade that will be assigned to that quiz is the grade of the Semester Examination if that quiz took place before the Semester Examination; the grade of the Final Examination if that quiz took place after the Semester Examination. 
Semester Examination • There will be no make-up Semester Examination. If the student fails to attend the scheduled Semester Examination without an approved absence from the Student Success Department, then a grade of zero will be assigned for the Semester Examination.
 • If the student fails to attend the Semester Examination and the Student Success Department confirms that the absence from the Semester Examination is approved, then the grade for the Final Examination will also be assigned as the grade for the Semester Examination.
A maximum of 40% of the course grade can be compensated through the above policy
The scheduling of the quizzes is not flexible. The quizzes will occur on the dates and time assigned to them above.

 

Honor Code Academic Pledge:
"As a Khalifa University student, I will not lie, cheat, steal, or use any unfair means in academic work and will behave according to university rules and UAE societal norms and expectations."
 
Teaching Plan (Lectures):
Week
 Dates
 Topics and Reminders
 
1
 Jan 13 – 17
 Basic concepts of probability, Probability axioms and Counting
 
2
 Jan 20 – 24
 Conditional probability and statistical independence, total law of probability, Bayes rule
 
3
 Jan 27 – 31
 Discrete random variables, PMF, Discrete random variables: Expectation, variance
 
4
 Feb 3 – 7
 Common discrete probability laws 
Assignment assigned to students

 
5
 Feb 10 – 14
 Continuous random variables: pdf, CDF, expectation, variance 
Quiz 1 
 
6
 Feb 17 – 21
 Common continuous probability laws

 
7
 Feb 24 – 28
 Random vectors, Joint distributions Marginal distributions (discrete rv), Expectation, Variance, Conditional distributions discrete random vectors Midterm Exam
 
8
 Mar 3 – 7
 Exp. of a function of r.v., Independence, Covariance and correlation discrete random vectors
Assignment Submission 
Semester examination (Monday October 14th)
 
9
 Mar 17 – 21
 Joint continuous distributions, Marginal distributions (continuous rv), Independence , Conditional distribution
 
10
 Mar 24 – 28
 Law of total probability and expectation, Exp of a function of a r.v, Covariance, correlation
Friday November 1st: Last Day to Withdraw with “W”
 
11
 Mar 31– Apr 4
 Linear combinations of random variables: mean and variance, Large Sample Theory
Quiz 2 
Project assigned to students
 
12
 Apr 7– 11
 Large Sample Theory, Descriptive statistics, Estimators
 
13
 Apr 14 – 18
 Sampling distributions, Confidence intervals for mean
 
 
14
 Apr 21– Apr 25
 Confidence intervals for proportion, Hypothesis testing
 
15
 Apr 28– May 2
 Hypothesis testing
Project Submission Friday May 2nd
Friday May 2nd: Last Day of Classes
 
This is a tentative schedule and may be adjusted as required.

Additional Information:
Assessment

There are 2 quizzes scheduled in this course. Each quiz will therefore count for 10% of your final grade for the course. There will be no make-up quizzes. If you fail to attend a scheduled quiz for any reason, then you will receive a grade of zero for that quiz.

Assignment 
In the week 3 of the semester, students will be provided an assignment in groups and they will have to submit the week before the Midterm. Each group will be composed of 3 or 4 students and will have a different data set. The assignment must be submitted in the week 8 of the semester. If the report is submitted late, the project grade will be decreased by 10% for each day of delay.
 
Project 
In the week 11 of the semester, students will be assigned a project regarding data analysis using a statistical software. Each group will be composed of 3 or 4 students and will have a different data set. A final report on the data analysis must be submitted in the week 15 of the semester. If the report is submitted late, the project grade will be decreased by 10% for each day of delay.

Calculator Policy
You may use a basic scientific calculator to help you with arithmetic calculations. Calculators with any sort of graphing, symbolic manipulation or integral and derivative calculation capabilities are strictly prohibited. Any such device found with a student during any form of assessment will be treated as a violation of the above-stated Honor Code Academic Pledge.

You will be permitted to only use a basic calculator in the Quizzes, Semester Examination and the Final Examination. 

Mobile phones may not be used as calculators in the Quizzes, Semester Examination or Final Examination. Mobile phones must be switched off during quizzes and exams and must be put away for the duration of the quiz/exam.
Classroom Policies

Discipline is one of the main components of your academic and professional success.
Please arrive at the class periods in a timely fashion. Classes will start as scheduled. Students arriving late to class are a distraction to both the instructor and the other students in the classroom. As per the University policies, any student arriving late to class is to be considered absent.
Please ensure that you sign your name on the Attendance Sheet which is handed-out at the beginning of each class period. If you do not sign the Attendance Sheet, then you will be marked “Absent” in the Banner.

If you are absent for any lecture, it is your responsibility to cover the missed material.
Homework Policy

You are expected to solve all examples presented in the classroom as well as exercises at the end of each section of the book. Homework solutions will not be collected-in nor graded. Homework is your responsibility. Assistance is readily available from the Instructor at his Office Hours.
 
Grading Scheme
The official Khalifa University of Science and Technology grading system uses letter grades with pluses and minuses.  Passing grades range from A to D; F is failing. Each letter grade is assigned a grade point on a four-point scale. Typical ranges associated with letter grades are set out below:

 Letter Grade Grade Point Description 
A 
 4.00 
 Excellent 
 
A- 
 3.70 
 Very Good 
 
B+ 
 3.30 
 
 
B 
 3.00 
 Good 
 
B- 
 2.70 
 
 
C+ 
 2.30 
 Satisfactory 
 
C 
 2.00 
 
 
C- 
 1.70 
 Less Than Satisfactory 
 
D 
 1.00 
 Poor 
 
F 
 0.00 
 Fail 
 
WF 
 0.00 
 Withdrew Failing 
 

The following is an indicative of typical ranges associated with letter grades for the KU courses. 
Letter Grade
 Percentage Grade Range
 Description
 

 A
 From 92.5% to 100%
 Excellent
 

 A-
 From 89.5% to less than 92.5%
 Very Good
 

 B+
 From 86.5% to less than 89.5%
 
 

 B
 From 82.5% to less than 86.5%
 Good
 

 B-
 From 79.5% to less than 82.5%
 
 

 C+
 From 76.5% to less than 79.5%
 Satisfactory
 

 C
 From 72.5% to less than 76.5%
 
 

 C-
 From 69.5% to less than 72.5%
 Less Than Satisfactory
 

 D
 From 59.5% to less than 69.5%
 Poor
 

 F
 Less than 59.5%
 Fail
 

MATH 242 Introduction to Probability and Statistics (3-0-3)____________
____________________________________________________________