--- Page 1 ---
Course Information Sheet
Course Code and Title MATH 232 Engineering Mathematics
Semester: Fall 2021
Instructor Name Dr. Ameena Al-Sumaiti
Contact Email ameena.alsumaiti@ku.ac.ae
Office Room No.
Office Hours After the class or By appointment
Assessment Methodology
Tentative Dates Weight
Coursework: Quiz # 1 Monday, Sept.13, 2021 13.33%
There are 4 quizzes scheduled Quiz # 2 Monday, Sep. 27, 2021 13.33%
for this course. Only the best 3 Quiz # 3 Monday, Nov. 1, 2021 13.33%
quiz scores will count towards Quiz # 4 Monday, Nov. 15, 2021 13.33%
your final grade, i.e. the lowest Quiz 40%
quiz score will be dropped. Weight
Each quiz will therefore count
for 13.33% of your final grade
for the course.
Tuesday, Oct 19, 2021 (Tentatively) 25%
Midterm Examination:
TBA by the Registrar’s Office 35%
Final Examination:
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 1 of 5

--- Page 2 ---
Instructor Policy on late submission of assignments:
There are no make-up quizzes/midterm in this course.
Any absence for an assessment needs to be validated by Student Success Office. If validated:
- for Midterm: The Final Exam result will become the result of the missed Midterm;
- for a quiz: There is no make up for a missed quiz. Student will receive zero credit for any missed quiz.
- for the Final Exam: the official university policy will be applied.
Only Student Success Office can declare an absence justified. Without an email to the instructor from
Student Success Office confirming that the absence is excused, absent students will receive a zero for
the missed assessment.
The scheduling of the classroom quizzes is not flexible. The tests will occur on the dates and time
assigned unless a major change in the academic calendar.
Grading Scheme
The official Khalifa University of Science and Technology grading system uses letter grades with
pluses and minuses. Passing grades range from A to D; F is failing. E ach letter grade is assigned a
grade point on a fo ur - point scale as set out below:
Letter Grade Grade Point Description
A 4.00 Excellent
A- 3.70
Very Good
B+ 3.30
B 3.00
Good
B- 2.70
C+ 2.30
Satisfactory
C 2.00
C- 1.70 Less Than Satisfactory
D 1.00 Poor
F 0.00 Fail
The following is indicative of typical ranges associated with letter grades for undergraduate
courses.
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 2 of 5

--- Page 3 ---
Honor Code Academic Pledge:
"As a Khalifa University student, I will not lie, cheat, steal, or use any unfair means in academic work
and will behave according to university rules and UAE societal norms and expectations."
TENTATIVE LECTURE PLAN
Teaching Plan
Week 1 -3 14.1 Functions of Several Variables
14.2 Limits and Continuity
14.3 Partial Derivatives
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 3 of 5

--- Page 4 ---
14.4 Tangent Planes and Linear Approximations
14.5 The Chain Rule
Quiz 1
Week 4-6 14.6 Directional Derivatives and the Gradient Vector
14.7 Maximum and Minimum Values
15.1 Double Integrals over Rectangles and Iterated Integrals
Quiz 2
Week 7-9 15.2 Double Integrals over General Regions
15.3 Double Integrals in Polar Coordinates
15.4 Applications of Double Integrals MidTerm
15.5 Surface Area
15.6 Triple Integrals
Week 10-12 15.7 Triple Integrals in Cylindrical Coordinates
15.8 Triple Integrals in Spherical Coordinates
Introduction to Complex Numbers
a. Complex arithmetic, complex argument, and polar form.
b. Complex powers, roots, trigonometric and exponential functions. Quiz 3
Week 13-15 11.1 Fourier Series
11.2 Arbitrary Period. Even and Odd Functions. Half-Range Expansions
11.3 Forced Oscillations
11.4 Approximation by Trigonometric Polynomials Quiz 4
11.7 Fourier Integral
11.8 Fourier Cosine and Sine Transforms
11.9 Fourier Transform. Discrete and Fast Fourier Transforms
Week 16 Final Exams
Additional Information:
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 4 of 5

--- Page 5 ---
Changes will be made to the timetable for the above Teaching Plan if more, or less, time is required for
students to successfully learn the individual topics.
Assessment
There are four quizzes, one midterm exam, and one final exam scheduled for this course.
There will be no make-up tests under any circumstances. In addition, for any online assessment, there
will be up to 20% grade deduction from each assessment in case of failure to follow any of the
Respondus procedure and 0 if there is no video.
Calculator Policy
Only basic calculators with no graphic display will be allowed during quizzes and exams.
Classroom Policies
Lectures start on time. For Online lectures, it is the student’s responsibility to make sure that his/her
computer is working, and the network is available. All technical issues must be addressed to the IT
department. A student that doesn’t log in or did not respond to the call of the instructor will be marked
“absent” in Banner, even if his/her name was shown on BB.
Please do not leave the online class, instructors may take the attendance many times during each period.
Students are expected to have for each class what they need for an effective lecture: handouts (posted on
Moodle), pen/pencil, notepaper, calculator etc.
Expectations from students
To succeed well in this course, students are required to work at least 1 hour outside the classroom for
each hour spend in class. This is an average requirement for an average student with a sufficient
background. It therefore could be more if some topics from previous courses are not known well enough.
Selected problems for each section are recommended as practice. Practice problems will not be
collected, but are essential part of the learning process, and are therefore mandatory.
Grading
Writing correct solutions is essential in the life of a scientist, including the correct use of the
mathematical symbols. Not only one needs to be understood by others, but only by paying attention to
what is written a student can acquire a good understanding of the concepts. Therefore, in all
assessments, the correctness of the solution writing will be evaluated and marks will be deducted
for mistakes (notations, clarity, structure of the solution, etc)
For quizzes and midterm, students have one week after they get back their copy to check if there are any
grading mistakes, and if so, ask for revision. After one week, the result will be considered final and no
more revision will be allowed.
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 5 of 5