--- Page 1 ---
Syllabus Supplement for Students
Course Code and Title CHEG332 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics II
Semester: Spring 2025
Instructor Name Dr. Giovanni Palmisano
Contact Email/ Office Ext. No. giovanni.palmisano@ku.ac.ae
nd
Office Room No. SAN Campus: Building 8 (Arzanah), 2 level, Room 8-265
Office Hours M,W: 2:00-3:00 pm
Assessment Methodology
Tentative Dates Weight
Quizzes 3 Quizzes TBA 15%
Laboratory Reports, Quizzes, Presentation Biweekly 20%
Semester Examination (s) Midterm exam Week 8 24%
Final Examination Final exam TBA 32%
Assignments 3 Assignments - 9%
Instructor Policies on Assignments:
Practice problems: they are essential to gain practice in solving thermodynamic problems. Problems
will be assigned biweekly, and students are expected to complete the problems. It is essential that
students do the homework to gain practice in solving the required course problems. I encourage students
to work together in teams on the homework. They can be discussed in the lecture or during help sessions
if there is a need. A good amount of material on tests and the final examination may be based on these
assignments.
Quizzes: These assessments will be designed to give you rapid feedback on how well you understand
the prior week’s topics. Each quiz will last for 75 minutes covering the materials discussed in class and
assigned in the homework. Unless stated otherwise, all quizzes are closed-book but open notes (official
lecture notes). The date of the quiz will be announced beforehand.
Exams: There will be a midterm exam during the semester and a comprehensive final exam. The date
of the exam will be agreed upon at least a week before the assigned time. Exams will be held on a
different location. All Exams–including the final–will be closed-book but open notes (official lecture
notes).
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 1 of 4

--- Page 2 ---
Lab: Five lab experiments will be conducted in biweekly session. Two weeks after each experiment is
conducted, each group of students must submit a formal lab report. More information on each lab,
description, report, and calculations will be given with the assignment.
Exam re-evaluation: If a student believes that there might be an error in grading a quiz or an exam,
he/she should see the instructor within one (1) week after the assignment/quiz or exam is returned. It
should be noted that the entire exam will be re-graded not just the problem in question, in order to ensure
consistence and fairness. Final course grades may only be contested by following the approved academic
appeal procedures.
A make-up exam will be allowed if approved by the Unievrsity. Repeated exams are normally more
challenging than the ones that are already given.
Attendance
 Students are expected to attend all classes on time. Attendance is required. Students that miss
lectures, tutorials, or other class activities, create significant gaps in their understanding and skill
development. Because of its vital importance, attendance will be recorded and reported to the
Registrar through Banner in each class meeting.
 Lateness to class will not be tolerated. Showing up after 5 minutes of commencing will be
considered as an absence. Leaving class while the instructor is lecturing is considered to be an
impolite behavior. Try not to leave unless it is an emergency.
Highlights of Excused Absences Procedure
 Absences resulting in missing any item of assessment worth up to 5% of the student’s final grade,
should be reviewed by the instructor who makes the final decision regarding missed assessment
grade calculation. In the absence of an official excuse approved by the University, the student
will be assigned a grade of 0% for missing an exam or assignment.
Honor Code Academic Pledge:
"As a Khalifa University student, I will not lie, cheat, steal, or use any unfair means in academic work
and will behave according to university rules and UAE societal norms and expectations."
TEACHING PLAN (Lecture):
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 2 of 4

--- Page 3 ---
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 3 of 4

--- Page 4 ---
Grading Scheme
The official Khalifa University of Science and Technology grading system uses letter grades with
pluses and minuses. Passing grades range from A to D; F is failing. E ach letter grade is assigned a
grade point on a fo ur - point scale as set out below:
Letter Grade Grade Point Description
A 4.00 Excellent
A- 3.70
Very Good
B+ 3.30
B 3.00
Good
B- 2.70
C+ 2.30
Satisfactory
C 2.00
C- 1.70 Less Than Satisfactory
D 1.00 Poor
F 0.00 Fail
The letter grades are associated with the following grade ranges:
Letter Grade Percentage Grade Range
(rounded)
A 93%-100%
A- 90%-92.9%
B+ 87%-89.9%
B 83%-86.9%
B- 80%-82.9%
C+ 77%-79.9%
C 73%-76.9%
C- 70%-72.9%
D 60%-69.9%
F < 60%
Syllabus Supplement for Students Page 4 of 4