--- Page 1 ---
COSC 354 Operating Systems
(2 Lecture, 3 Laboratory – 3 credits)
Prerequisite:
COSC 201
Course Catalogue Description:
This course covers the important problems in operating system design and implementation. The course will start with a
brief historical perspective of the evolution of operating systems that covers the major components, including process
management (processes, threads, CPU scheduling, inter-process communication, and deadlock management), memory
management (paging, segmentation, and address translation), device and file management.
Textbook:
th
1. Operating Systems Concepts, by A. Silberschatz and P. B. Galvin. Publisher: Addison Wesley, 10 edition, 2021,
ISBN: 1118063333.
2. KU ECCE354 Laboratory Manual.
Reference Materials:
th
1. Modern Operating Systems by Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Publisher: Pearson, 4 Revised Edition, 2014, ISBN:
9781292061429.
Course Topics:
1. Historical overview: Motivation for operating systems, historical perspective. (1 lecture)
2. OS concepts, functions, and structure: Basic functions and components of a general-purpose operating system. OS
concepts and system calls. (3 lectures)
3. Processes, Inter-Process Communication, and Threads: process model, process table, process state diagram, context
switching, shared memory, pipes, and sockets. Thread models and communication. (6 lectures)
4. Process Synchronization and Management: race condition and critical regions, mutual exclusion with busy waiting,
sleep and wakeup, semaphores, mutexes, Producer/consumer, and read/write problems and solutions. (6 lectures)
5. Deadlock management. (2 lectures)
6. Process scheduling: goals of process scheduling, preemptive and non-preemptive scheduling. Scheduling in batch
and interactive system. Round-robin, priority scheduling, starvation, and aging. (4 lectures)
7. Memory management: functions of memory manager, basic management techniques, multiprogramming modeling
and issues, swapping. Virtual memory with paging, address translation, page tables, multi-level tables, TLB, page
replacement algorithms, page fault handling. Segmentation of memory. (6 lectures)
8. File and device management. (2 lectures)
Course Structure and Learning Methodologies:
Lectures are 2 x 50 minutes per week. The laboratory sessions are 1 x 120 minutes per week. The course uses a
combination of in-class and out-of-class learning methods. In-class methods include lecture presentations in
PowerPoint, workable exercises, tutorials, live demos of operating system tools and OS internals to illustrate key
concepts, and YouTube videos made by the instructors. Out-of-class methods include hands-on assignments and
projects on theoretical and practical aspects of Linux and Windows OSes. Labs follow the lectures to provide hands-on
experience for the studied subjects. Heavy participation and interaction between instructor and students are exhibited
in class and during office hours to solidify concepts and enrich the learning experience.
Computer Resources:
PCs and/or Workstations with Unix, Linux, and/or Windows OS
Laboratory/Assignments Topics: (not necessary in this order)
• Introduction to Linux/Ubuntu Platforms
1

--- Page 2 ---
• Basic Operating systems functionalities
• System Calls () in Linux
• Process Management & Threads
• Process Synchronization (Solution to producer-consumer problems)
• Deadlock Modeling
• CPU Scheduling
• Memory Management
Laboratory Resources:
Computer lab must be equipped with the latest Linux/Ubuntu operating system.
Assessment:
All course learning outcomes are assessed using the following assessment tools.
Coursework (quizzes, assignments) 20%
Laboratory 20%
Semester Examination 25%
Final Examination 35%
Contribution to Engineering Program Learning Outcomes:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
H - - - - H M
H – High M – Medium L – Low
Mapping of Course Learning Outcomes & Engineering Program Learning Outcomes:
Course Learning Outcomes Eng. PLOs
1. Identify the basic components of a general-purpose OS and key concepts of
threads and processes such as process management, inter-process 1
communication, process synchronization, process scheduling, and deadlock
management.
2. Solve process/thread management, communication, and synchronization 1
problems.
3.
4. Analyze performance of various CPU scheduling algorithms 6
5. Compare different design aspects and techniques of memory management 1,6
including such as virtual memory, paging, and segmentation.
Contribution to CS Program Learning Outcomes:
1 2 3 4 5 6
H H - - - H
H – High M – Medium L – Low
Mapping of Course Learning Outcomes & CS Program Learning Outcomes:
Course Learning Outcomes CS PLOs
1. Identify the basic components of a general-purpose OS and key concepts of threads
and processes such as process management, inter-process communication, process 1,2
synchronization, process scheduling, and deadlock management
2. Solve process/thread management, communication, and synchronization problems. 1,2,6
3. Analyze performance of various CPU scheduling algorithms. 1,2
2

--- Page 3 ---
4. Compare different design aspects and techniques of memory management. 1,2
3

--- Page 4 ---
Syllabus Supplement for Students
Course Code and Title COSC 354 Operating Systems
Semester:
Fall 2025
Instructor Name Azzam Mourad
Contact Email/ Office Ext. No. azzam.mourad@ku.ac.ae
Office Room No. D04209
Office Hours Tuesday-Thursday: 12PM-1PM and 2PM-3PM
Monday-Wednesday: By appointment
Assessment Methodology
Tentative Dates Weight
Quizzes and assignments 2-3 quizzes + Assignments 20%
Laboratory Weekly Tasks 20%
Semester Examination (s) Week 8 25%
Final Examination Week 16 35%
Instructor Policy on late submission of lab exercises:
You are strongly recommended to return your lab solutions in the due date. Delays will be penalized
byone grade per day unless exceptional circumstances.
Honor Code Academic Pledge:
"As a Khalifa University student, I will not lie, cheat, steal, or use any unfair means in academic work
and will behave according to university rules and UAE societal norms and expectations."
4

--- Page 5 ---
TEACHING PLAN (Tentative) (Lecture):
Week 1: Historical overview: Motivation for operating systems, historical perspective.
OS concepts, functions and structure: Basic functions and components of a
general-purpose operating system.
Week 2: Operating System Structure and System calls in Operating Systems
Week 3: Processes and Threads: process model, process table, process state diagram,
and context switching.
Week 4: Processes and Threads: Inter-Process Communications
Quiz 1
Week 5: Threading in Operating System.
Week 6: Process Synchronization: race condition and critical regions, mutual
exclusion with busy waiting.
Week 7: Process Synchronization: Sleep and wake up, Semaphores, mutexes,
message-passing.
Week 8: Producer/consumer and read/writeproblems and solutions.
Midterm Exam
Week 9: Deadlock management and deadlock modeling algorithms.
Week 10: Process scheduling: goals of process scheduling, preemptive and non-
preemptive scheduling. Scheduling in batch and interactive system
Week 11: Round-robin scheduling, priority scheduling, starvation and aging.
Week 12: Memory Management: functions of the memory manager, basic
management techniques, multiprogramming modeling, and issues,
swapping.
Quiz 2
Week 13: Memory Management: Virtual memory with paging, address translation,
page tables, multi-level tables, TLB
Week 14: Memory Management: Page replacement algorithms, page fault handling.
Segmentation of memory.
Week 15: Directories organization and operations. File system implementation.
(if time permits)
5

--- Page 6 ---
Grading Scheme
The official Khalifa University of Science and Technology grading system uses letter grades with
pluses and minuses. Passing grades range from A to D; F is failing. Each letter grade is assigned a
grade point on a four-point scale as set out below:
Letter Grade Grade Point Description
A 4.00 Excellent
A- 3.70
Very Good
B+ 3.30
B 3.00
Good
B- 2.70
C+ 2.30
Satisfactory
C 2.00
C- 1.70 Less Than Satisfactory
D 1.00 Poor
F 0.00 Fail
The following is indicative of typical ranges associated with letter grades for KU Undergraduate
courses.
Letter Grade Percentage Grade Range
A From 92.5% to 100%
A- From 89.5% to less than 92.5%
B+ From 86.5% to less than 89.5%
B From 82.5% to less than 86.5%
B- From 79.5% to less than 82.5%
C+ From 76.5% to less than 79.5%
C From 72.5% to less than 76.5%
C- From 69.5% to less than 72.5%
D From 59.5% to less than 69.5%
F Less than 59.5%
6